Add lambda `params` proposal (#6542)
dotnet/csharplang: proposals/lambda-method-group-defaults.md

> # Default and Variable Parameters for Lambdas and Method Groups

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Default and Parameter Array Parameters for Lambdas and Method Groups
```

Author: What about "Optional and Parameter Array Parameters for Lambdas and Method Groups" (since "default parameters" are not a thing https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/pull/6542#discussion_r994975532)? 3351f2725b0b524cd9d7000cfbd8d96d5b0c82be. And wouldn't "Optional and `params` Array Parameters for Lambdas and Method Groups" be even better?

Also, should I change the filename (currently `lambda-method-group-defaults.md`)?

## Summary

[summary]: #summary

> To build on top of the lambda improvements introduced in C# 10 (see [relevant background](#relevant-background)), we propose adding support for default parameter values and [`params` arrays](https://docs.microsoft.com/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/keywords/params) in lambdas. This would enable users to implement the following lambdas:

Reviewer: I don't think we really need the docs link. If we want to link to anything, we should link to the csharpstandard repo, but I don't think a link is necessary at all here.

Author: OK, thanks. Removed the link: b811c74f82222febb9630d215ef68698edea21d2

addWithDefault(); // 3
addWithDefault(5) // 6

> var counter = countMethod;

Reviewer 2: >counter [](http://example.com/codeflow?start=4&length=7)

Minor: It looks like we switch between `var count = ...` and `var counter = ...` throughout the document. Unless there is a reason for having two distinct names, consider choosing one.

Author: Good catch, thanks. 0661f1fb0b893c301f2d8255fcd1fd08d1a04939

```

## Current Behavior

> Currently, when a user implements a lambda with a default or `params` parameter, the compiler raises an error stating that it's not allowed. 

Reviewer 2: >raises an error stating that it's not allowed.  [](http://example.com/codeflow?start=94&length=47)

Since there are examples below, perhaps just "reports an error."

> Currently, when a user implements a lambda with a default or `params` parameter, the compiler raises an error stating that it's not allowed. 

Reviewer 3: >default or `params` parameter [](http://example.com/codeflow?start=50&length=29)

nit and not directly related to this PR: the spec uses "default_argument" and "optional parameter", but I've not seen "default parameter" before.

Author: Good catch, I have also been wondering whether to change that. So, now I did: 9c3e329cb5c26b955774f73f2f89714c2a28dbbb

When a user attempts to use a method group where the underlying method has a default or `params` parameter, this information isn't propagated, so the call to the method doesn't typecheck due to a mismatch in the number of expected arguments.
```cs
void M1(int i = 1) { }
var m1 = M1; // Infers Action<int>
m1(); // error CS7036: There is no argument given that corresponds to the required parameter 'obj' of 'Action<int>'

void M2(params int[] xs) { }
var m2 = M2; // Infers Action<int[]>
m2(); // error CS7036: There is no argument given that corresponds to the required parameter 'obj' of 'Action<int[]>'
```

## New Behavior

Following this proposal, default values and `params` can be applied to lambda parameters with the following behavior:

```csharp
var addWithDefault = (int addTo = 2) => addTo + 1;
addWithDefault(); // 3
addWithDefault(5); // 6

var count = (params int[] xs) => xs.Length;
count(); // 0
count(1, 2, 3); // 3
```

Default values and `params` can be applied to method group parameters by specifically defining such method group:

```cs
int addWithDefault(int addTo = 2) {
  return addTo + 1;
}

var add1 = addWithDefault; 
add1(); // ok, default parameter will be used

> int count(params int[] xs) {

Reviewer: While we're here, can you do a pass to make all of these method names follow C# `PascalCase` convention?

Author: Good idea. 322230de0c13a49e980d67dc0ebe5e54ed26a04d

void DoAction(Action<int> a, int p) {
  a(p);
}

int Count(params int[] xs) {
  return xs.Length;
}
var counter = Count; // Inferred as anonymous delegate type
DoFunction(counter, 3); // Error, cannot convert from anonymous delegate type to Func

int DoFunction(Func<int[], int> f, int p) {
  return f(new[] { p });
}
```
The impact of this breaking change needs to be considered. Fortunately, the use of `var` to infer the type of a method group has
only been supported since C# 10, so only code which has been written since then which explicitly relies on this behavior would break.

## Detailed design

[design]: #detailed-design

### Grammar and parser changes
This enhancement requires the following changes to the grammar for lambda expressions.
```diff
 explicit_anonymous_function_parameter_list
+    : explicit_anonymous_function_parameters (',' parameter_array)?
+    | parameter_array

> +    ;

Reviewer 4: The grammar changes imply that we support `params` and optional parameters in anonymous methods. Essentially `delegate (params int[] a)`. I don't see any examples of this in the spec though. Is it intended to be allowed?

Author: Yes, I think that lambdas and anonymous methods are the same in this regard. I don't know if that was the intention. But if yes, I can mention `delegate () {}` anonymous methods in the proposal...

Author: I changed the grammar to disallow these improvements in `delegate { }` syntax: 8585a197713535978d072b975737835fe149a03f

I based my syntax on [the one from `lambda-improvements.md`](https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/blob/main/proposals/csharp-10.0/lambda-improvements.md#syntax). But I don't quite understand why it mentions `equals_value_clause`, it's not defined anywhere and seems unused in that proposal. So, in my diff of the syntax, I act as if it wasn't there...

> The natural type of an anonymous function expression or method group is a *function_type*. A *function_type* represents a method signature: the parameter types, **default values, ref kinds, `params` modifiers**, and return type and ref kind. Anonymous function expressions or method groups with the same signature have the same *function_type*.

The following addition (in bold) is required to the [delegate types](https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/blob/main/proposals/csharp-10.0/lambda-improvements.md#delegate-types) specification in a prior proposal:

> The delegate type for the anonymous function or method group with parameter types `P1, ..., Pn` and return type `R` is:
>
> - if any parameter or return value is not by value, **or any parameter is optional or `params`**, or there are more than 16 parameters, or any of the parameter types or return are not valid type arguments (say, `(int* p) => { }`), then the delegate is a synthesized `internal` anonymous delegate type with signature that matches the anonymous function or method group, and with parameter names `arg1, ..., argn` or `arg` if a single parameter;
> [...]

### Binder changes

#### Synthesizing new delegate types

> As with the behavior for delegates with `ref` or `out` parameters, a new natural type is generated for each lambda or method group defined with any optional or `params` parameters.

Reviewer 2: >a new natural type is generated for each lambda or method group [](http://example.com/codeflow?start=67&length=63)

This text wasn't added in this PR but it's not clear what "natural type" means. Assuming this refers to the synthesized delegate type, perhaps it should say "delegate types are synthesized for lambdas or method groups with optional or `params` parameters."

Author: It's not clear to me either. Changed: 69d5c7ecbbbc173f9280083af57491fcfb3b7245 Thanks.

### Grammar and Parser Changes
This enhancement requires the following changes to the grammar for lambda expressions.
```diff
 explicit_anonymous_function_parameter_list
+    : explicit_anonymous_function_parameters

> +    | explicit_anonymous_function_parameters ',' parameter_array

Reviewer 2: Consider combining:
```
    : explicit_anonymous_function_parameters (',' parameter_array)?
```

+    | parameter_array
+    ;
+
+explicit_anonymous_function_parameters
     : explicit_anonymous_function_parameter
       (',' explicit_anonymous_function_parameter)*

>      ;

Reviewer 3: Looking at the baseline spec for [method parameters](https://github.com/dotnet/csharpstandard/blob/draft-v7/standard/classes.md#1462-method-parameters), consider whether some parts should be repeated here.

For instance, "A parameter with a ref, out or this modifier cannot have a default_argument.", "A parameter_array may occur after an optional parameter, but cannot have a default value – the omission of arguments for a parameter_array would instead result in the creation of an empty array."

Or we could just refer to that section and say that the same rules apply.

Author: Makes sense, thanks. 3649b5bf0a6060442c998d8c46167a23504d65b8

 explicit_anonymous_function_parameter
-    : anonymous_function_parameter_modifier? type identifier
+    : anonymous_function_parameter_modifier? type identifier default_argument?
     ;
```
No changes to the grammar are necessary for method groups since this proposal would only change their semantics.

### Binder Changes

#### Synthesizing New Delegate Types

> As with the behavior for delegates with `ref` or `out` parameters, a new natural type is generated for each lambda or method group defined with any default or `params` parameters.

Reviewer 3: We should spell out how we are updating the prior spec on [function types](https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/blob/main/proposals/csharp-10.0/lambda-improvements.md#natural-function-type) and [delegate types](https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/blob/main/proposals/csharp-10.0/lambda-improvements.md#delegate-types)?

For instance, the delegate types should now say something like:

> The delegate type for the anonymous function or method group with parameter types P1, ..., Pn and return type R is:
> - if any parameter or return value is not by value, **or any parameter is optional or `params`,** or there are more than 16 parameters, or any of the parameter types or return are not valid type arguments (say, (int* p) => { }), then the delegate is a synthesized internal anonymous delegate type with signature that matches the anonymous function or method group, and with parameter names arg1, ..., argn or arg if a single parameter;
> ...

The function type section would now say something like:
> A function_type represents a method signature: the parameter types, **default value, and ref kind and `params` modifier,** and return type and ref kind.

The function type section also says:
```
Function_types are used in a few specific contexts only:
- implicit and explicit conversions
- method type inference (§11.6.3) and best common type (§11.6.3.15)
- var initializers
````
So those sections should be reviewed (and updated as needed) for impact of default values and `params` as well.

Author: Alright, thanks, I added how the prior proposal should be updated: 9c3828f58a451d8a8e502933034e6f4032a6727e.

> The function type section also says:
> 
> ```
> Function_types are used in a few specific contexts only:
> - implicit and explicit conversions
> - method type inference (§11.6.3) and best common type (§11.6.3.15)
> - var initializers
> ```
> 
> So those sections should be reviewed (and updated as needed) for impact of default values and `params` as well.

I don't follow. Do you mean to update the section that defines the contexts where *function_type*s are used? I think those stay the same.

Reviewer 3: I meant, make sure to read the rest of the [C# 10 lambda spec](https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/blob/main/proposals/csharp-10.0/lambda-improvements.md?rgh-link-date=2022-10-13T18%3A30%3A26Z#natural-function-type) and make similar edits to other sections that might be affected.

Note that in the below examples, the notation `a'`, `b'`, etc. is used to represent these anonymous delegate types.

```csharp
var addWithDefault = (int addTo = 2) => addTo + 1;

> // internal delegate int a'(int arg0 = 2);

Reviewer 2: >int arg0 [](http://example.com/codeflow?start=28&length=8)

`int arg`

Author: Right, thanks. Fixed also in other places: bc44898d4a61c1efe13e00c486dc3bb03323c040

var printString = (string toPrint = "defaultString") => Console.WriteLine(toPrint);
// internal delegate void b'(string arg0 = "defaultString");
var count = (params int[] xs) => xs.Length;
// internal delegate int c'(params int[] arg0);
string pathJoin(string s1, string s2, string sep = "/") { return $"{s1}{sep}{s2}"; }
var joinFunc = pathJoin;
// internal delegate string d'(string arg0, string arg1, string arg3 = " ");
```

#### Conversion and Unification Behavior 
Anonymous delegates with default parameters will be unified when the same parameter (based on position) has the same default value, regardless of parameter name.

> 

Reviewer 2: Do we need a similar statement for delegates for `params` cases?

Author: Added: 8f426e696075d4da1bc724b7a52ababee9acf8c6

b = f; // Allowed
e = g; // Allowed

d = (int c = 10) => 2; // Error: default parameter value is different between new lambda
                       // and synthesized delegate b'. We won't do implicit conversion
```

> Anonymous delegates with an array as the last parameter will be unified when the last parameter has the same `params` modifier, regardless of its name.

Reviewer 2: >the same `params` modifier, regardless of its name [](http://example.com/codeflow?start=100&length=50)

Perhaps "the same `params` modifier and array type, regardless of parameter name".

Author: That sounds better, thanks. 755b66af3cfdd99d8ef804eea3f1299fc01fd965

                              
Del del1 = (int x = 1) => x; // Allowed, because default parameter value in lambda matches default parameter value in delegate

Del del2 = D; // This behavior does not change and compiles as before as per the method group conversion rules 

var d = D;
// d is inferred as internal delegate int a'(int arg = 1);

Del del3 = d; // Not allowed. Cannot convert internal delegate type to Del.
              // Note that there is no change here from previous behavior, when d would be inferred
              // to be Action<int> since Action<int> also cannot be converted to a named delegate type.

int E(params int[] xs) {
  return xs.Length;
}

delegate int DelParams(params int[] xs);

DelParams del4 = (int[] xs) => xs.Length; // Error: `params` modifier does not match, so no conversion can be performed

DelParams del5 = (params int[] xs) => xs.Length; // Allowed

DelParams del6 = E; // Allowed as before per the method group conversion rules

var e = E;
// e is inferred as internal delegate int b'(params int[] arg);

DelParams del7 = e; // Not allowed. Cannot convert internal delegate type to DelParams.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Consider including a conversion to non-`params` delegate if not already covered:
```csharp
delegate int DelArray(int[] xs);
DelArray d8 = (params int[] xs) => xs.Length; // Allowed
d8 = E; // Allowed
var e = (params int[] xs) => xs.Length;
d8 = e; // Not allowed. Cannot convert internal delegate type to DelArray.
```

Reviewer 2: Should an error be reported converting a `params` lambda expression to a non-`params` delegate?

Author: > Consider including a conversion to non-`params` delegate

Good catch, thanks. Included: 728d5b5a8a5ab34e4a0f7dfd100c0faefe1fc107

> Should an error be reported converting a `params` lambda expression to a non-`params` delegate?

I believe yes for similar reason as converting a lambda expression with optional parameter to a delegate without: the default value / `params` modifier would effectively useless.

### IL/Runtime Behavior

The default parameter values will be emitted to metadata. The IL for this feature will be very similar in nature to the IL emitted for lambdas with `ref` and `out` parameters. A class which
inherits from `System.Delegate` or similar will be generated, and the `Invoke` method will include `.param` directives to set default parameters or `System.ParamArrayAttribute` &ndash; 
just as would be the case for a standard named delegate with default or `params` parameters.

> These delegate types are able to be inspected at runtime, as normal.

Reviewer 2: >are able to be [](http://example.com/codeflow?start=21&length=14)

Perhaps "can be".

Author: Thanks. 0286e34e15bc1b1fb67c091c7364fa5db108f003
